# exql v3 Release Notes

2026-03-30
Yusuke SAKURAI
Software Engineer at LoiLo Inc.

## Summary

We are releasing `exql` v3, the second major update since 2020. Over the three years since the v2 release, we have found that the tool is mature enough to keep using for the next three years.

In developing v3, we concentrated on tightening security and returning to our original design concept: **Safe**.

## Cleaning a Vulnerability

`exql` is a thin, dependency-small tool. Until now, we had relied on a few external modules to fill very small gaps.

However, the situation around us has changed silently. We still use `exql` aggressively internally. Developers are mostly satisfied with its features. Other ORM libraries are absolutely not attractive to us.

Over the past several years, we have seen a decline, or at least a stabilization, in the Go community. Many well-known tools have been archived, and developers have dispersed. Of course, I understand that this is part of the nature of free and open source software. But there is one thing we cannot accept: **vulnerability**.

## Importance of Purity

Recently, we found a highly dangerous zero-day vulnerability in one of `exql`'s dependencies. I reported the issue to the maintainers and recommended that they fix the problem. But no response came back. The project is completely dead.

So, we decided to remove all external dependencies and make `exql` a "pure" module from v3 onward. Now all core logic is implemented in Go (`database/sql`) and `exql` itself.

## Migration

From v3, `loilo-inc/exql/v3/null` will be used for nullable column fields in generated models. It inherits the implementation of `sql.Null[T]`, which was added in Go 1.22. We additionally added several interfaces to fill the remaining gap.

`sql.Null[T]` implements:

- `driver.Valuer`
- `sql.Scanner`

`null.Null[T]` implements additionally:

- `json.Unmarshaler`
- `json.Marshaler`
- `encoding.TextUnmarshaler`

These are the interfaces that were implemented in `volatiletech/null`.

## Performance

We introduced minor performance improvements. For details, see:

<https://github.com/loilo-inc/exql/pull/72>

## Breaking Changes

- `exql.Mapper` has been removed, as planned.
- `xerrors` has been replaced with `errors` / `fmt` due to its deprecation.

### Error handling changes

`exql.ErrRecordNotFound` has changed from a variable to a struct. Use `errors.Is` to check for it. From v3, all explicit errors are exported as structs.

```go
err = MapRows(rows, &dest)
if errors.Is(err, ErrRecordNotFound{}) {
  // do something
}
```

